If you need any evidence about
unpredictably the war in Iran is
changing the world, consider how it
might end up affecting a mostly
forgotten conflict over on the other
side of the planet on some windswept
mostly empty islands that only two
countries even care about. When you look
at these islands on Google or Apple
Maps, you'll see them labeled as the
Falkland Islands, which are what the
British call them, and then in
parentheses Islas Malvinas, which is
what the Argentines call them. The first
sign of many that these islands are in
fact bitterly disputed between the
United Kingdom
and have been for about two centuries
now. And at roughly 12,000 square
kilometers in overall area, these
islands are physically larger than you
might have initially expected, coming in
at about the same size as Northern
Ireland or the island of Puerto Rico,
making them by far the largest
territorial dispute of the modern United
Kingdom. [music]
The islands are currently controlled and
administered by the UK and are home to a
little more than 3,600 British citizens,
[music]
two-thirds of whom all simply live
within the island's capital of Stanley.
But what Argentina strongly disputes and
has long claimed is an illegal colonial
era occupation of their land that they
[music] even went to war over back in
the 1980s. While the United States has
historically maintained a neutral
position, balancing between both
countries that have usually been close
American allies. But in a recent
internal Pentagon memo that was leaked
and published by Reuters in late April
of 2026, the Trump administration is
evidently exploring reversing this
long-time position of neutrality on the
Falklands-Malvinas issue by shifting
more towards Argentina. The memo
explored potential methods that the
United States could take as retaliation
or punishment against its own NATO
allies for their refusal to take part or
offer assistance in the US-Israeli war
on Iran. Trump has grown increasingly
publicly frustrated with Britain's Prime
Minister, Sir Keir Starmer, over this
issue in recent months.
>> [music]
>> Sir Starmer has repeatedly stated that
the war in Iran does not concern Britain
and that Britain will not take any part
in it. He initially refused to allow the
US to utilize British air bases for the
purpose of attacking Iran and has
refused to contribute any British forces
to assist with reopening the Strait of
Hormuz after the Iranians forced it
shut. He has also strongly voiced his
opposition towards Trump's separate
demands to annex Greenland and has been
publicly critical of Trump's severing of
American military and financial aid to
Ukraine as well. All of which has
invoked Trump's personal fury.
>> [music]
>> He has denounced Sir Starmer as no
Winston Churchill and has referred to
the British government as cowards for
refusing to help reopen the Strait of
Hormuz. Whilst Sir Starmer has voiced
his own frustration at the war in Iran
raising British energy prices. [music]
It is increasingly being considered the
biggest rupture in US-UK relations since
the Suez Canal crisis of 1956.
And it's not just their leadership that
is currently divided, either. The
American and British publics are going
increasingly distant from one another,
as well, as shown by [music] this data
collected from Gallup and YouGov. At the
beginning of the 21st century, [music]
more than 80% of the public in both
countries held a favorable view of the
other. In just the past five years,
though, the favorable view of Britain in
America has declined from 91% to 76%,
while the favorable view of America in
Britain has practically crashed from a
high of more than 80% 34% today. And so,
in the context of these deteriorating
relations, enters the leaked memo from
the Pentagon suggesting that Washington
is actively considering a dramatic
change in policy relating to the
Falklands-Malvinas dispute, especially
in light of Trump's significantly closer
personal relationship with Argentina's
President Javier Milei. Trump has
previously referred to Milei as his
favorite president and the two are very
close ideologically conservative allies
whom Trump has repeatedly helped both
financially and politically. Milei has
closely aligned his own foreign policy
with Trump, especially when it relates
to Israel and the war on Iran. And
ironically, the roles have basically
reversed since 1982 when Argentina
invaded the Falklands Malvinas. When
then President Ronald Reagan's close
personal relationship with Prime
Minister Margaret Thatcher was decisive
in Washington ultimately siding with
Britain during the conflict. Now, if
Trump's much closer personal
relationship with Javier Milei leads the
United States in a formally abandoning
neutrality in the Falklands Malvinas
dispute by firmly siding with Argentina
on the issue instead, both as a favor to
Milei and as a punishment for Sir Keir
Starmer and the British, the
implications would be profound and it
could even result in the UK becoming
forced to negotiate with Argentina,
which could end up resulting in the UK
even losing their control over the
islands at a critical moment.
>> [music]
>> American diplomatically siding with
Argentina over this dispute would
probably represent the final and
irrevocable death of the so-called
special relationship that has defined
US-UK relations since the Second World
War. And it would almost certainly
result in swift British retaliation,
like revoking the US military's access
to important British military bases like
Lakenheath and Mildenhall in the UK
mainland, and Ascension Island in the
South Atlantic, and most importantly of
all, to Diego Garcia in the center of
the Indian Ocean, which the US military
has been able to use for decades as a
forward operating base for its B-2
bomber fleet to attack targets across
the Middle East from.
Whatever ends up happening, the
Argentinian side has reacted with
elation to even the prospect of
Washington taking its side in this
dispute. Javier Milei has already stated
that he is actively working on a roadmap
for the islands to become a part of
Argentina through diplomatic means.
While his vice president, Victoria
Villarruel, has taken a much more
explosive and confrontational posture on
social media. Writing on X shortly after
the Pentagon memo was leaked, "quote,
Today, more than ever, the Malvinas are
Argentine. The discussion over the
sovereignty of our islands is between
states. [music] Therefore, the United
Kingdom must discuss bilaterally with
Argentina the claim that we maintain.
The Kelpers, which for context is a
derogatory slang term used by Argentines
for the Falkland Islander residents, are
English people who live in Argentine
territory. They are not part of the
discussion." Adding on later in another
post, "quote, If they feel English, they
should go back to the thousands of miles
away where their country is." End quote.
The British government, meanwhile, has
responded as they almost always have,
that their sovereignty over the islands
is completely non-negotiable, and that
the right of self-determination of the
Falkland Islanders themselves, who
overwhelmingly wish to remain British,
must be respected. Despite this, the
gravity of the dispute that is felt
between the Argentinean and British
publics could likely not be any more
different. The Falklands Malvinas are
located only about 500 km away from
Argentina's shores, [music]
but nearly 13,000 km away from Britain
on the other side of the world. If you
asked an Argentinean and a Briton to
point these islands out on a map, it's
almost certain that the Argentine would
be more likely to be able to do so. And
this is because Argentina's claim to the
islands is firmly ingrained into the
country's entire national identity, its
education, and its politics. It is
explicitly [music]
written into the Argentine constitution
that the government's claim to the
islands cannot be abandoned under any
circumstance. All official government
maps produced in Argentina and all
public school textbooks display the
islands as belonging to Argentina. This
map, the Argentinian government's
official map as of 2022, prominently
displays the Falklands Malvinas as a
part of the nation. Along with other
islands currently controlled by the
British they also dispute like the South
Georgia and Sandwich Islands along with
the Antarctic Peninsula. The Argentine
passport prominently displays the
islands as a part of the nation.
Argentine national identity cards
feature an outline of the islands on
their back but they are even featured on
Argentine currency like the 50 peso
note. The Argentine weather service even
provides forecasts for the Falklands
Malvinas every single day. Well, the
main arrival terminal in Buenos Aires
prominently displays a giant billboard
that reads "Las Islas Malvinas son de
Argentina" or "The Malvinas Islands are
Argentinian" one of the country's most
well-known patriotic slogans. The
islands are almost constantly present in
the public conscience of Argentines
frequently ranking near the very top of
the country's foreign policy priorities.
While recent polling has shown that more
than 80% of Argentina's population
supports continuing the claim to them
across the country's internal political
spectrum regardless of left or
right-wing viewpoint. And this is all
despite the fact that save for only a
couple of months in 1982 when they
invaded and occupied the islands, they
have been continually controlled and
administered by the British for nearly
two centuries now since 1833.
>> [music]
>> And meanwhile in Britain, the issue over
the islands is a much much more distant
and overlooked one. They are
geographically far away and out of mind
for most. Are never prominently featured
on any government maps, documents, or
currency. Are rarely discussed outside
of important anniversaries or news
events typically ranking near the bottom
of foreign policy priorities. While
polling as recently as 2024 suggests
that 46% of Britons wouldn't even care
either way if the islands became
Argentine at some [music] point in the
future. And in order to understand where
this conflict may be going in the future
and what it means in the present, it
helps to start with how it all began in
the first place and why the disputed
[music]
history of these islands had made them
the most geopolitically controversial
landmass today in the South American
continent.
Even the exact date of discovery of
these islands are presently disputed.
The British claim that the islands were
first discovered by the English
navigator John Davis in 1592,
but the Argentines generally assert that
they were discovered earlier by both
Amerigo Vespucci in 1502 and again by
Ferdinand Magellan in 1520
>> [music]
>> who were operating on behalf of the
Spanish and Portuguese crowns
respectively. Regardless, the first
conclusively documented human landing on
these islands took place more than a
century later than any of these early
sightings in 1690
when the English Captain John Strong
made his landing and named them after
his patron Anthony Carey who was then
the fifth Viscount of Falkland. The
English found the islands to be
completely uninhabited at the time of
this landing and they're broadly
believed by modern archaeologists to
have never been settled or inhabited by
any humans before this landing. Which
interestingly makes the Falklands
Malvinas one of the few landmasses in
the world outside of Europe that truly
was first discovered and settled by
Europeans without any preexisting
indigenous population. Which also in
effect makes the European settlers who
later came to these islands their actual
true indigenous population.
But those settlers would come much later
in the islands history because John
Strong left the islands with all of his
men very quickly after setting foot on
them, considering them to be essentially
a hard to inhabit windswept rainy rocky
set of islands without even a single
tree to speak of anywhere on their
surface and where agriculture was
considered too challenging to be worth
stay.
The first actual permanent settlement on
the islands wouldn't be established
until 1764
and it was by the French here on the
eastern large island that they called
Port Saint Louis. Then just 2 years
later in 1766,
the British established the second
permanent settlement in the islands on
the westernmost major island that they
called Port Egmont. Even though Spain
didn't have any actual physical presence
on the islands at the time, they still
claimed them anyway. And after they
discovered the French and British had
established colonies on them without
their approval, they grew outraged. And
so France agreed to sell their colony at
Port Saint Louis to Spain in 1766 in
order to assuage tensions. Spain then
renamed that colony to Puerto Soledad,
but tensions lingered with the British
presence that continued at Port Egmont
after they refused to sell. With both
the British and the Spanish coming to
claim sovereignty over all of the
islands against each other.
As the American Revolutionary War
approached, however, financial pressures
on the British forced them to abandon
their colony at Port Egmont in 1774.
They left behind a plaque and a flag in
their colony proclaiming that British
sovereignty over the islands was not
being surrendered and then abandoned it
for decades. That ended up leaving the
Spanish in de facto control over all of
the islands for a long time. Though
Britain never abandoned its claim to
have a right to return at any time. The
Spanish ended up destroying the remains
of the abandoned British settlement at
Port Egmont, hauled off the plaque and
the flag they left behind to Buenos
Aires, and between 1774 and 1811, the
islands were directly ruled as a part of
the Viceroyalty of the Rio de la Plata,
the colonial predecessor to modern-day
Argentina, whose capital was Buenos
Aires. 18 Spanish governors were
appointed to administer the islands
during this time. But then in 1811,
facing pressure from the Napoleonic Wars
in Europe and from the rise of
independence movements in Latin America,
the Spanish ultimately abandoned their
colony in the islands as well. And just
like the British did decades earlier,
they also left behind a plaque and a
flag claiming continued sovereignty over
the islands for Spain despite their
abandonment. That effectively left
behind no actual governmental presence
on the islands at all for a number of
years, as it came to become primarily
used as a hunting ground for British and
American sealers. Argentina would
ultimately declare its independence from
Spain in [music] 1816, and believed that
it inherited Spain's claim to the
Falklands Malvinas Islands as well,
despite them still being abandoned at
the time. Argentina eventually got
around to sending an expedition to
establish a settlement on the
uninhabited island a few years later in
1824,
but the settlers were severely
unprepared for the climate and the lack
of resources on the island they would
face. And so they gave up and abandoned
the settlement after only a few months.
A second Argentine settlement attempt in
1826 also failed for similar reasons,
and then a third attempt in 1828 finally
established a small fledgling colony of
the abandoned Spanish settlement of
Puerto Soledad that they renamed again
to Puerto Luis. [music] And it was this
third settlement attempt by the
Argentines that led to tensions with the
British, who despite having had no
physical presence on the islands for
more than half a century by this point,
had also still never abandoned their
claim to continued sovereignty over
them. In 1829, Argentina began
appointing military governors of the
islands based on their small and
struggling settlement at Puerto Luis,
and they then trying to assert their
sovereignty over the islands more
strongly. So, a few years later in 1833,
the British decided to send a naval
squadron to re-establish their own
sovereignty on the islands and to
counter the Argentine presence. [music]
And this is where some of the historical
interpretations of what happened
diverge. The British showed up to the
struggling Argentine colony at Puerto
Luis in 1833, and found that by that
point it was only home to around 30
people remaining, which was the only
Argentine presence on the islands. The
British demanded that the Argentines
surrender and to lower their flag and
replace it with a British one.
>> [music]
>> The top-ranking Argentine officer in
charge of the colony calculated that he
was dramatically outnumbered and
outgunned by the British. And though he
protested against the British verbally,
he ultimately agreed to surrender
without a fight and left back for the
Argentinian mainland. Britain then
assumed direct control of her Puerto
Luis and the rest of the islands, and
they've mostly maintained control over
them with a permanent presence for the
past nearly two centuries ever since.
Argentina's official record of events
claims that the British then expelled
all of the 30 or so Argentine settlers
who were then living on the islands.
Though the only historical records that
have been made publicly available
indicate that only four of them chose to
leave voluntarily afterward, and the
rest of them stayed. Now, Argentina's
position since this time has
historically vacillated between mild
indignation [music]
and passionate rage and accusations that
the British stole the islands out from
under them under duress in 1833.
Argentina presently asserts that they
have never once in their history given
up their claim to sovereignty over the
islands, and they regard the continuous
British presence on them over the past
nearly two centuries as a long illegal
occupation.
>> [music]
>> Britain, meanwhile, reorganized the
islands into a crown colony in 1840 and
then encouraging settlers from the
mainland to begin migrating to them,
whose descendants eventually grew into
the modern population of British
residents on the islands numbering
around 3,600, all of whom Britain
regards as full British citizens with
the right of self-determination.
And all of whom Argentina regards as
illegal occupiers or settlers who do not
have a right to self-determination.
As early as 1885, Argentina was
publishing maps displaying the Falklands
Malvinas as their own territory. And
although the British report that they
only ever acknowledged one Argentinian
government protest over the issue prior
to the Second World War, independent
researchers have claimed at least 27
recorded protests on behalf of the
Argentinian government between 1833 and
the Second World War, nearly all of
which were simply never acknowledged or
ignored by the British government and so
were never recorded by them in their
official [music] record. Regardless, the
issue with the sovereignty dispute over
the Falklands Malvinas remained almost
entirely inconsequential and forgotten
by virtually everybody till after the
end of the Second World War. When the
British Empire began declining and
granting many of their former colonies
their independence, which led to the
post-war Argentinian government sensing
that they too had an opportunity for
regaining control over the Falklands
Malvinas as well, which they began
presenting as another colonial
possession of Britain's that should be
returned. Argentina immediately raised
the sovereignty dispute over the islands
at the UN after its formation in 1945
and called for bilateral negotiations
over their status with the UK, which the
UK refused under the argument that the
islands are an inseparable part of the
country. And this has broadly remained
constant ever since, with Argentina
demanding that the sovereignty over the
islands should be negotiated between
them and the UK bilaterally and with the
UK simply refusing to entertain
negotiations over the issue at all with
the belief that it's already been
settled since the British population of
the islands don't want to be Argentine.
Notably, however, the UK offered to have
the dispute over the islands taken to
the International Court of Justice in
The Hague to decide in 1947, in 1948,
and again in 1955. All of which were
rejected by Argentina, who continued
demanding bilateral negotiations with
the UK directly and exclusively without
any third-party mediation. Now, even
before this issue would eventually erupt
in a full-scale war between the UK and
Argentina in the 1980s, the drama over
the islands' disputed status was
steadily building and building up for
years. In 1965, the UN passed a
resolution that called on the UK and
Argentina to enter into the bilateral
negotiations that Argentina was
demanding in order to find a peaceful
solution to the island status, which the
UK continued ignoring while asserting
that the island sovereignty and the
wishes of its residents was
non-negotiable. The next year in 1966, a
group of radical Argentine nationalists
hijacked a civilian airliner and forced
the flight's captain at gunpoint to land
in the Falklands Malvinas. Once there,
they raised the Argentine flag on the
island, took several of the British
islanders hostage at gunpoint, and
demanded that the island's governor
immediately recognize Argentina's
sovereignty. They were immediately
surrounded by the island's small
garrison of Royal Marines and local
militia, however, and surrendered the
very next day. Though it was an early
harbinger of things to come and a sign
of just how seriously some Argentines
took their country's claim to the
islands and their anger at Britain's
refusal to negotiate.
Across the 1970s, the UK and Argentina
engaged in some talks with each other
over the Falklands Malvinas issue. At
this time, the islands were of very
little economic use to the UK with a
tiny population whose economy was almost
entirely dependent on fishing and sheep
herding. So, the thought of giving them
up to Argentina in order to smooth over
relations with the whole of Latin
America, which the dispute was
constantly playing, was considered by
many in the British government to
actually be prudent. The idea of
establishing joint sovereignty in the
islands with Argentina was discussed
intermittently within the British
government throughout the 1970s. As was
an idea about giving the islands to
Argentina and leasing them back from
them for a period of 99 years in order
to give the islanders generations worth
of notice to plan their lives
accordingly. Similar to the arrangement
that Britain had previously made with
Hong Kong before returning it back to
China. But, none of these ideas ever
advanced any further than simple
discussions and certainly never became
official British governmental policy.
The discussions were always extremely
politically toxic among the Falkland
Islanders themselves, who overwhelmingly
wanted to remain British and did not
want to join Argentina under any
circumstances. While Argentina posed the
ideas as well, since they preferred an
immediate and exclusive transfer of
sovereignty of the islands instead.
Protests and demands for negotiations by
the Argentine government continued
throughout this entire period as did
Britain's ignoring. So then, with the
diplomacy still going nowhere, multiple
compounding factors contributed to the
outbreak of major warfare over the
islands in the early 1980s. Argentina at
this time was being ruled by a far-right
military junta dictatorship that was
growing increasingly unpopular over the
tanking economy and was facing
large-scale protests and civil unrest.
The junta calculated that if they could
just score an easy victory to win back
public support again, like by finally
taking control over the Falklands
Malvinas Islands with minimal effort,
which was something broadly supported by
the entire Argentine political spectrum,
they could get out of their rut and
continue staying in power. The junta
catastrophically miscalculated that
neither Britain nor America would
ultimately do anything to resist a
full-scale surprise invasion of the
islands. The junta was viciously
anti-communist and had been useful to
Washington during the Cold War by
crushing the left within Argentina
during the Dirty War, in which tens of
thousands of left-leaning Argentines
were disappeared and killed. Well, they
also deployed military advisers and
volunteers to combat communist
insurgencies elsewhere in Latin America,
like in Nicaragua. And thus, this led
the junta to calculate that they were
too valuable to America for America to
intervene against them over an invasion
of the Falklands Malvinas. And in the
case of Britain, the junta could see how
extremely unseriously they were taking
the defense of the islands and region at
the time. The islands were only defended
by one Royal Navy patrol vessel, and
even that was announced to be
withdrawing from the region by the
British in 1981.
In addition to the Falklands Malvinas
Islands, the Argentines also dispute the
sovereignty of nearby islands like South
Georgia and the Sandwich Islands with
the UK as well. And in early 1982, after
a group of Argentine scrap metal workers
occupied South Georgia and rose the
Argentine flag on the island, and
Britain didn't really strongly respond
to it, the junta interpreted it as
further evidence that Britain would not
strongly push back against an invasion
of the larger Falklands Malvinas Islands
either. So, at about this time, the
junta prepared an all-out amphibious
invasion of the Falklands Malvinas
Islands that they code-named Plan Goa,
after India's invasion and annexation of
the Portuguese colony of Goa in 1961.
The invasion was launched on the 2nd of
April, 1982. It consisted of an initial
amphibious invasion force of 680
Argentine Marines and commandos, along
with 20 amphibious assault vehicles,
assisted by numerous naval vessels,
helicopters, and aircraft support from
the mainland that was only about 500 km
away. Meanwhile, the British defenses on
the islands at this time consisted of
only 68 Royal Marines and a couple dozen
lightly armed local militia who had no
heavy weaponry or armor, no meaningful
air defenses, no major warships, and no
combat aircraft. The British simply did
not anticipate that Argentina would
actually be bold enough to launch an
all-out amphibious invasion of the
islands. But, they did, and they brought
enough firepower and manpower with them,
outnumbering the local defenders by 10
to 1, that they were able to rapidly
overpower them and force to surrender in
less than 48 hours. Argentina then
rapidly reinforced their troop presence
on the islands to roughly 10,000 men,
the largest number of people the islands
have ever seen at one time in their
history, and they fully expected the
British to roll over and accept the
situation for what it was, and simply
surrender the islands, believing that it
would prove too logistically challenging
for them to force them out since the
British mainland was nearly 13,000 km
away.
But, that's not what ended up happening.
And after Argentina ignored a UN
Security Council resolution to
immediately withdraw, Margaret
Thatcher's relatively new government in
the UK decided to respond to the
Argentine invasion with a naval and air
task force to kick them out instead.
What followed was a devastating and
bloody 74-day war over the islands that
saw some of the most intense military
action fought by Western armies since
the Second World War. By the end of it,
when Argentina surrendered, 649
Argentine service members had been
killed in action, and more than 1,600
others had been wounded, while 255
British service members were killed in
action, and another 775 others wounded.
Along with another three Falkland
Islander civilians were also killed
during the war as well.
The legacy and consequences of this war
have been felt heavily across both
Argentina and the UK, as well as in the
United States and across Latin America.
The disaster of the war's outcome for
Argentina contributed to the hunter
regime's collapse shortly afterwards,
and along with the legacy of the long
dirty war that preceded it, contributed
to decades of underfunding of the
country's military. Although Argentina
has still never abandoned their claim to
the Falklands Malvinas. Almost
ironically, Argentina's decision to
invade the islands in 1982 and to fight
a bloody war over them has also ever
since effectively made it impossible for
the UK to ever consider giving them up
now. While the British government was
actively having serious discussions on
giving the islands up in the 1970s and
the early '80s immediately before the
war, the fact that 255
British service members' blood was spilt
on the islands to keep them British
during the 1982 war makes giving them
away now seem like a betrayal of their
sacrifice, [music] which very few UK
politicians have since been willing to
even suggest. The Falklands War remains
the third bloodiest war that the UK has
fought since the 1950s.
It resulted in more British deaths than
the war in Iraq, and it resulted in
roughly 1/3 of the British military's
deaths in just two months as the entire
troubles in Northern Ireland caused over
nearly three decades. Giving up the
islands to Argentina now after all of
that sacrifice, probably to most
Britons, is utterly unthinkable, and it
makes the Falklands completely
incomparable to other territories that
the UK gave up like Hong Kong. And for
the United States, the consequences of
the war have remained underappreciated,
but no less consequential. While the US
indeed initially took a neutral position
in the war when it started, attempting
to balance between two of its top Cold
War allies, it eventually sided firmly
with the British side, providing Britain
with missiles, intelligence, fuel, and
diplomatic support that was considered
to be so vital, one former top advisor
of Thatcher's government, along with the
assistant US defense secretary at the
time, have both claimed that without it,
Britain would have likely lost the war
and would have had to accept Argentina's
occupation. Much of the decision to do
so was predicated on then US President
Reagan and then UK Prime Minister
Thatcher's exceptionally close personal
and ideological relationship, but the US
decision to do so was reputationally
disastrous throughout Latin America and
the global south. Every single country
in Latin America backs the Argentine
claim to sovereignty over the Falklands
Malvinas. And Washington's decision to
throw what was then the most
anti-communist and pro-American country
in Latin America under the bus over the
issue in favor of a European nation
showed plainly to everyone else in Latin
America that none of them were actually
safe from the Americans. Argentina was
and is a member of the Rio Treaty and
the Organization of American States
alongside the US. And so America's
decision to back its NATO ally Britain
in the war against its fellow Rio Treaty
ally Argentina was widely seen as a
massive break from the previous century
of the US prioritizing hemispheric unity
against outside non-hemispheric powers
from Europe. When Mexico later withdrew
from the Rio Treaty two decades later in
2002, [music] one of its top listed
grievances for doing so was pointing out
how nobody in the alliance came to
assist Argentina during the 1982
Falklands Malvinas War. To the rest of
Latin America and the global South, the
conflict over the Falklands Malvinas
dispute came to be seen as yet another
battle in the ongoing global struggle
for decolonization.
And Argentina's decision to attack the
islands came to be seen by this camp in
the same lens as India's decision to
attack the Portuguese colony of Goa or
Egypt's decision to forcefully seize the
British and French-owned Suez Canal.
[music] Actions that were similarly
by Western nations at the time they
happened, but which steadily came to
become accepted. Since the end of the
war and their military victory, Britain
has also substantially increased their
military defenses of the islands along
with their rhetorical and political
commitments to keeping the islands
British indefinitely.
In 1985, just a few years after the end
of the war, the UK opened up a vast
military fortress on the islands called
RAF Mount Pleasant. Complete with long
runways for fighters and rapid resupply
by heavy cargo planes. Hard and concrete
shelters for aircraft storage, radar and
command facilities, and barracks and
logistics sites. This has enabled the
British military the ability to rapidly
airlift reinforcements to the islands
during a time of crisis. Well, most
importantly of all, the British also
maintain a permanent presence of four
Eurofighter Typhoon FGR.4 fighter jets
at RAF Mount Pleasant, as well. Which
are highly advanced 4.5 generation
fighters that are substantially more
capable than anything in the modern
Argentine Air Force. Two of those
Typhoon fighters are also kept in
perpetual quick reaction alert status.
Meaning that they're always loaded up
with fuel and weapons with pilots on
standby. They can be airborne and ready
to fight anytime, 24 hours a day, 7 days
a week, within just 15 minutes of the
notice being given. An extremely
resource-intensive state that makes RAF
Mount Pleasant one of only three British
military bases worldwide to actually do
it. Unlike in 1982, when Argentina
invaded and the British had zero combat
aircraft present to stop them, any
invasion attempt today would have to
immediately deal with these highly
capable and modern fighters. The UK also
maintains aerial refueler tankers and
heavy transport aircraft on the islands,
as well. Along with a permanently
deployed battery of Sky Sabres. The UK's
own land- based surface-to-air missile
defense system that can engage enemy
fighters, missiles, and drones, alike.
Meaning that even if enemy aircraft were
somehow able to circumvent the fighters,
they'd still have to deal with the
islands' anti-air systems, which also
didn't exist at all in 1982.
The British also maintain a permanently
deployed offshore patrol vessel from the
Royal Navy on the islands now, as well.
Along with a permanently deployed
British Army garrison with rotating
infantry and support units. All told,
the British military presence on the
islands these days usually numbers as
many as 1,700 personnel at any given
time, which is about half of the
civilian population on the islands and
more than 20 times as many military
personnel as they kept on the islands
prior to Argentina's 1982 invasion. And
then there's also still the British
military's base further back at RAF
Ascension, too, which enables the Royal
Air Force to have a convenient refueling
and rearmament base about halfway
between the Falklands and the British
mainland.
All of this is, of course, very
expensive for the British military to
maintain, however. In addition to the
constant blood that Britain paid during
the 1982 war, [music] it also cost the
British government an estimated 2.8
billion pounds at the time to fight it,
equivalent to nearly 10 billion pounds
in today's value. And in order to
continue their current levels of
military defense on the Falklands, the
UK spends around 150 million pounds
every single year when factoring in both
the direct costs of the garrison on the
islands and all of the wider supporting
costs involving airbridge flights and
naval patrols. This means that every
year, the UK spends roughly 42,000
pounds on the defense of the Falklands
per resident of the islands, which is
also equivalent to roughly 55%
of the GDP of the Falklands that is
perpetually spent on defense every
single year as well. If the Falklands
were their own independent country, they
would have by far the highest ratio of
military spending in the world as a
percentage of GDP, eclipsing even
Ukraine's current military spending,
which only hovers around 40% [music] of
its GDP as it is dealing with a
years-long active full-scale invasion.
Britain has maintained this high level
of defense and military spending on the
Falklands for decades ever since the
1982 war, which many have argued has
successfully deterred Argentina from
ever attempting another attack on the
islands. But many others have argued
that the justification for continuing to
do so has declined more and more as the
threat posed to the islands by Argentina
has grown weaker and weaker as the
Argentine economy has declined.
Argentina has basically been trapped in
a perpetual economic crisis since the
1980s and its war-fighting capabilities
have significantly deteriorated since
the 1982 invasion as well. Argentina's
military spending as a percentage of GDP
crashed from a high of between 3.5 and
4.7% of GDP leading up to the 1982
invasion to less than 1% of GDP by the
early 2000s and managed to decline even
further to as low as 0.5% of GDP by the
early 2020s. And 90% of that budget by
that point was simply being used to pay
out salaries and pensions with virtually
nothing left over at all to maintain or
acquire equipment. Some military
analysts have suggested that Argentina
might have had literally zero
operationally combat-ready fighters in
their air force by the time of the
2000s, let alone any credible amphibious
and naval capabilities that would be
required to invade the Falklands
Malvinas again. By the 2020s, Argentina
maintained the lowest military spending
on the entire South American continent
as a percentage of GDP and this time,
were they to ever attempt another
invasion, they would have to commit
substantially more forces to it than
they did back in 1982.
Pulling off another successful surprise
invasion of the islands like they did
back then today would be practically
impossible. Britain would see it coming
from far away and would have adequate
time to prepare for it with rapid aerial
reinforcements. [music] In order to
maintain a three-to-one advantage in
manpower that's considered the bare
minimum balance of forces for an
attacker, the Argentines would have to
commit a minimum of 6,000 troops to the
initial amphibious invasion force today.
A huge army that would be nearly 10
times the number of forces that they
committed to the initial phase of the
1982 invasion. And they would have to do
all of this with limited amphibious
transport and under almost certain
British aerial and naval supremacy as
well. Simply put, invading the islands
again anytime soon is not a viable
option that Argentina can take. After
coming into power at the tail end of
2023, Javier Milei is slowly shifting
Argentina's military capabilities into a
more powerful direction, but it will
still take years before the country is
even moderately more capable. Milei's
stated objective is to quadruple
Argentina's military spending from 0.5%
of GDP when he assumed office to 2% of
GDP by 2032. And to transform it back
into an actually competent military
force again in the process. [music] In
2024, he agreed to purchase 24 used F-16
fighter jets from Denmark for a price of
300 million dollars, 40 million dollars
of which was provided by the United
States, and the first deliveries of
which started to be made in early 2026.
These F-16s will be armed with Raytheon
produced medium-range air-to-air
missiles as part of a nearly 1 billion
dollar arms package that was recently
inked with the US, which will
significantly improve the Argentine Air
Force's capabilities. But these older
F-16s are still going to be less capable
than the more advanced Eurofighter
Typhoons that the UK maintains on the
Falklands Malvinas, and they'll do
nothing to actually help with
transporting the thousands of soldiers
across the ocean to the islands that the
Argentines would still require to have a
chance at another invasion attempt.
Argentina will likely not possess the
military capability to credibly threaten
the islands again, at least for another
decade and probably for even longer than
that. But, that doesn't mean that they
won't have the means to threaten them
diplomatically instead. Unlike in the
1980s, however, the Falklands-Malvinas
are dramatically more important to
whoever controls them today because
since the war, a mother lode of oil has
been discovered within the waters around
the islands in the Sea Lion oil field
about 220 km north of them, which was
only discovered fairly recently in 2010.
As of 2025, it's believed that this oil
field could contain as much as 1.2
billion barrels of oil according to the
company that's about to start production
in it, which is more oil than what's
currently believed to be left in the
North Sea. At current inflated market
values in the oil market because of the
Iran war, the value of all that oil is
hovering around 125
billion dollars. Production in the
field, long under development for years
now, is finally scheduled to begin next
year in 2027.
And once it's going, it's projected to
provide the 3,600 Falkland Islanders
with 5.6 billion pounds worth of
royalties that'll be paid out over 30
years, which will theoretically make
every one of the Falkland Islanders
today millionaires. It will dramatically
boost the islands' economy and will
provide as much as 10% of the entire
UK's current rate of oil consumption for
decades.
All of this is, of course, to the
staunch opposition of Argentina, who
considers the oil to be theirs just like
they do the islands, and who considers
all of these current oil operations here
to be illegal. Britain ultimately has a
much stronger incentive to defend their
position on the islands now because of
this oil factor, while Argentina has an
even stronger incentive to be assertive
towards their own claim for the same
reason. Moreover, the islands are also
the central link to Argentina's other
territorial disputes with Britain in the
South Atlantic in South Georgia and the
South Sandwich Islands and also in
Antarctica, which might contain further
untold volumes of oil for the taking
after the current Antarctic treaty
expires in 2048.
Now, there are three primary reasons why
the dispute over these islands is
suddenly coming to a head now in the
2020s.
One, of course, is this new oil factor,
which has made the islands dramatically
more economically relevant than they
ever were before in the past [music]
with tens of billions of dollars on the
line now. The second is the fraying
relationship between the UK and the US
over the fallout of the Iran war and
Trump's ambitions to annex Greenland.
And Trump's personally much closer
relationship with Javier Milei instead.
And the third is the potential precedent
that may have also recently been set by
the UK's agreement in 2024 to hand over
the Chagos Islands back to Mauritius. In
short, all of Mauritius used to be a
British colony, but the British
administratively carved out a separate
colony from Mauritius out of the Chagos
Islands before they granted Mauritius
their independence. And they also
expelled the entire population of the
Chagos Islands in order to make way for
the important joint UK-US military base
at Diego Garcia. Then, after Mauritius
gained their independence, the British
continued to hang on to the Chagos
Islands as their own colony. And
Mauritius continually disputed this and
claimed the Chagos Islands as their own
territory for decades, which the British
consistently ignored. The case was
eventually taken to the International
Court of Justice in 2017, which ruled
against the UK in 2019 and demanded that
the UK return the islands back to
Mauritius again. Under mounting
international pressure that followed
that ruling, especially after Russia's
invasion of Ukraine, which made the
British position in the Chagos Islands
look pretty hypocritical, Britain
finally entered into negotiations with
Mauritius over the issue, and a couple
years later in 2024, agreed to return
the islands back to them in order to
comply with international law. But,
similar to the deal they came up with
Hong Kong a century before, they also
carved out a lease back agreement
covering the all-important military base
at Diego Garcia, in which Mauritius will
lease Diego Garcia back to the UK for a
lengthy of 99 years, so that they can
maintain the base there for at least
several more generations.
However, doing this has also set a new
precedent concerning the
Falklands-Malvinas Islands in the eyes
of Argentina and Javier Milei, who
himself has openly claimed that
Britain's decision to return the Chagos
Islands back to Mauritius proves that
one day they could be forced into giving
the Falklands-Malvinas to Argentina as
well. In many ways, the situations
between the Chagos Islands and the
Falklands-Malvinas Islands are very
different though. For one, Britain never
fought a war over the Chagos Islands and
paid hundreds of lives and billions of
pounds to defend them like they did with
the Falklands. Argentina cites the cases
of Britain's return of Hong Kong to
China and the Chagos Islands to
Mauritius as precedents, but Britain
fundamentally disagrees with this take.
The British position on the
Falklands-Malvinas dispute is that
except for the two months in 1982 when
Argentina invaded and occupied the
islands, they have continually and
peacefully been administered and
governed by the British since [music]
1833 for nearly two centuries now. They
cite that the UK has claimed and settled
the islands as early as 1765 before
Argentina even existed as a country,
that they didn't abandon their claim to
the islands in 1774 when they abandoned
their early initial settlement there,
and that there were no indigenous
peoples of the islands who were
displaced or massacred as in other
colonial projects. And then after the
British returned back to the islands
again in 1833, they expelled the
Argentine military presence that was
there, but allowed the Argentine
civilian residents to remain. And then
most of them chose to do so, and that
these only numbered a few dozen people
anyway. The UK therefore asserts that
today, the 3,600 or so civilian
residents on the Falkland Islands who
are British citizens are also the
islands' indigenous people, and that
they have a fundamental right to
self-determination guaranteed by the UN
Charter, which has been reinforced by a
referendum on sovereignty in the islands
that they hosted in 2013, in which an
overwhelming 99.8%
of the vote on a turnout of 92% of
eligible voters all chose to remain
British. Literally everyone but three
people who took part in that referendum
voted to remain British. And one of
those three people said that he voted
against it simply because he felt that a
true 100% vote would have looked too
suspicious.
Argentina, meanwhile, continues to base
their own claim to the islands on their
belief that they legally inherited
Spain's claim to the islands upon their
independence in 1816. [music] And their
argument that the British effectively
abandoned their claim to the islands
after they spent nearly six decades
without any physical presence on them
between 1774 and 1833.
Argentina claims that in addition to
their inheritance from Spain, they
acquired sovereignty over the islands
when they first claimed them in 1820,
when they were uninhabited, which was
confirmed by Argentina's initial
settlement and presence on the islands
that they established between 1826 and
1833.
Regardless of how small and fledgling
that settlement and presence was.
Argentina further argues that Britain's
return and takeover of the islands and
their takeover of the Argentine
settlement in 1833 was an act of force
that was protested against, that was
illegal under international law, and
that Britain has continued to illegally
occupy the islands and refused to
entertain any and all negotiations for
nearly two centuries ever since. Well,
they also claim that Britain expelled
all of the Argentine civilians from the
islands in 1833 as well. Argentina
therefore argues that Britain's claim of
self-determination for the Falkland
Islanders is not legitimate because
Argentina claims that they are a
transplanted population of British
character and nationality who were
brought in as settlers or occupiers of
rightfully Argentine land.
Javier Milei has repeatedly stated that
he has no intention of deploying
military force to settle the
Falklands-Malvinas issue again. And he
has stated that his hope is that it will
be negotiated and settled through
diplomacy over the course of decades.
Most of the Western discourse that I've
read about this conflict online seems to
overwhelmingly back the British point of
view on the islands and considers the
Argentine position to be ridiculous or
even cartoonish. But this sentiment
betrays the fact that most of the world
outside of the West actually supports
the Argentine position. As I mentioned
before, every single country in Latin
America explicitly supports the
Argentine claim to the islands. As do
both China and Russia, who are permanent
members of the UN Security Council.
India, who is the world's most populous
country, and ironically, even Britain's
fellow European countries, Spain and
Ireland. And most recently, also Israel,
who formally recognized Argentina's
claim to the islands in 2025 after
Javier Milei indicated his intention to
relocate Argentina's embassy to Israel
from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. The only
other countries in the world who have
expressed their support for the British
position on the islands are Canada,
Australia, and New Zealand, all
Anglosphere countries who are close to
Britain politically and culturally,
along with Malaysia, Turkey, Sierra
Leone, and Taiwan, which itself lacks
significant international recognition.
For now, the United States, along with
most of the rest of the world, continues
to maintain the officially neutral
position on this dispute that it has
always maintained in its attempt to
balance between two countries that it
has both historically considered to be
allies. If Trump or another president
ultimately leads the US to tilt this
balance and formally side with
Argentina, however, the biggest
consequence isn't likely to be
militaristic, but diplomatic, because
Britain will become increasingly
diplomatically isolated on this issue,
and with the exception of Canada, will
face almost complete unity in the
Western Hemisphere opposed to their
continued presence on the islands. Three
out of five of the permanent UN Security
Council members will have taken firm
stances against them. And if Argentina
pushes for diplomatic support or
intervention at the UN to try and force
the UK to enter into the bilateral
negotiations they have resisted for
centuries, the US may stand aside or
even actively support it. It's also
likely that if the US begins to
recognize Argentina's claim to the
islands, other US-aligned countries
elsewhere in the world would likely
follow suit, which could eventually
begin putting unbearable diplomatic
pressure on the UK to at least engage
Argentina in negotiations.
Figuring out the geopolitical dispute
over the Falklands/Malvinas will likely
be as difficult going forward as it's
already been for decades, but something
that is very much figured out, on the
other hand, is what you should watch
next or at least put on your list. And
that's The China That She Grew Up In, A
Grand Theory of Xi Xi
which is a Nebula exclusive, which means
that it exists only on the streaming
service that myself and a whole bunch of
other creators put together called
Nebula. Created by my friend PolyMatter,
this documentary explores the dramatic
rise to power of Xi Jinping. From
sleeping on the floor of a cave to
leading one of the two global
superpowers of the 21st century, it's an
incredible story that is well worth your
time and will help you understand even
more about the modern world we live in.
Then there are also my own projects on
Nebula like Mad Kings, a show that
explores the darker histories of some of
modern history's other most well-known
dictators, including other recent
historical figures who clashed with the
Western world like Libya's Muammar
Gaddafi and Iraq's Uday Hussein. Along
with episodes covering the reigns of
North Korea's Kim Il Sung and Kim Jong
Il, that explore how they were actually
able to avoid a US intervention. And
then there's also my other Nebula series
called Modern Conflicts, which explores
modern wars, battles, and conflicts at a
level of depth and detail that would
never work out on YouTube without
triggering this site's demonetization
and age restriction policies. With
episodes you can watch covering the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, Hamas's
attack on Israel on October 7th, the
overthrow of the Assad regime in Syria,
and Israel's invasion of the Gaza Strip
that all explain the crucial backstory
information you need to understand
what's currently happening in the Middle
East right now. These are my own
projects, but there's also just so much
good stuff on Nebula from other creators
right now that you can also watch, too.
There's Day Pass hosted by Jason from
Not Just Bikes, that explores the world
through the lens of public transit down
on the ground. If you wondered whatever
happened to Lindsay Ellis, she's been
making her usual documentaries on Nebula
for years now instead of YouTube.
There's Patrick Willems' latest short
film The Dinner Plan, featuring big
names like Griffin Newman and Zack
Cherry. There's Abolish Everything, our
new comedy debate premise recorded live
in New York. Scav, a docu-series
produced by the Wendover Productions and
Jetlag folks tracing the incredible
drama and unfoldings of the world's
largest annual scavenger hunt hosted at
the University of Chicago, and Oldest
and Newest Places by Joe Scott, a
full-length documentary exploring the
oldest and newest rocks on the planet
and what it takes to visit them. I can
honestly keep going and going, but just
believe me when I say that with every
month that goes by, the Nebula catalog
keeps getting deeper, [music] making
becoming a subscriber even better. But,
we also need you to help keep this whole
cycle going. We have a great deal
running right now that when you use my
link at nebula.tv/reallifelore
or by scanning the QR code here on your
screen or clicking the button, you'll
get a whole 50% off of an annual Nebula
subscription, which will bring the cost
for you down to just $30 for the entire
year or $2.50 per month, a small
fraction of the price of other streaming
services. As other streamers keep
raising their prices, this is an awesome
deal. And if you want to sign up for a
lifetime subscription to Nebula and then
never deal with a monthly subscription
ever again, you can get one for 40% off
right now for $300 as well. So, give us
a shot, and thank you so [music] much
for supporting not only my own channel,
but all of the other creators who are
building Nebula with their own awesome
content as well. And as always, thank
you so much for watching.